Michael Nygard’s Architectural Decision record idea (https://cognitect.com/blog/2011/11/15/documenting-architecture-decisions) is a very good approach in documenting decisions about a particular codebase’s architecture as it evolves. My subjective experience on this is that if applied with discipline, onboarding process is faster in an “ADR-enabled” project and the mistakes of the past are less likely to be repeated in the future (even though the team responsible for the project changes a lot). It also helps avoiding lengthy debates about what should/should not have been done during the project’s history, also helps current architectural decisions by explaining the reasoning behind past ones. With the rise of agents coding approaches, ADRs help a lot in guiding LLMs to make code changes which are more in line with the existing architecture (and history) of the codebase.

The core idea (document a decision with its status and potential consequences) can be applied during research projects. Such projects are not sure to succeed (indeed they fail a lot), and since the route to a successful state is not known, usually move forward by applying a lot of ideas iteratively to see which one works against a common baseline. A good example of such research project is traditional machine learning, where eg. during the process of feature engineering usually numerous approaches need to be tried until a satisfactory one is found (based on some research-dependent baseline metric). The search process for a successful state can be also documented using a Research Decision Record, which documents the path (and decisions taken) during the process, very much like how an ADR covers how and why an architecture of a certain codebase modified over time.

With the help of LLMs/agentic approaches more and more ideas can be implemented and tested, therefore the overall process of research is considerably faster. However, especially due to the massive amount if trys-and-fails the structure of the research codebase could become very chaotic even in the short run. We can help guiding the language models to overcome this by setting up guardrails, but we might also want to collect the findings (and the progress) of the research in a central location. An RDR document can act as such central location. If we are using agents ways to perform (and essentially supervise) the research effort, we can also help the agents streamline their work when looking for new ideas to try - so that they do not repeat and learn from the mistakes of the past.

What is important in the process is that relevant decisions need to be always recorded in a concise fashion. However, by creating specific agents guardrails (such as document the RDR process in a CLAUDE.md in the case of Claude CLI) we can force the agents to append the decision record more-or-less automatically when the time comes. Such CLAUDE.md can be written like this:

<<< CLAUDE.md >>>

Also, very much like individual software components in agent skills, ideas can be referenced more easily from individual prompt sessions if there is a central place storing them. In most cases new concepts also based on older, less successful tries so this can be useful in the thought searching process.
